---
layout: post
title: "Everything That Went Wrong For UBC Solar At FSGP 2025"
categories: Solar
tags:
    - Ideas
    - Drafts
author:
 - Christopher Kalitin
redirect_from:
  - /Solar/2025/07/07/ubc-fsgp-2025.html
word_count: 42069
---
<head>
    <meta property="og:image" content="{{site.url}}/assets/images/nasa-end-state/msr.jpg">
</head>

All notes locations:
1. Docs
2. Apple Notes
3. Laptop Notes
4. Alex Ezzat Messages

Elec issues:
1. Slaveboards
2. MDI / DRD connectors
3. Telemetry issues just before going on the track
4. Motor

Problems in order:  
1. Slave boards  
    a. Balancing in transit?  
    b. isoSPI issues again  
    c. Balancing LEDs not turning on  
    d. Solution? replace board, replace LTC, replace mosfets, resistors too maybe  
2. Wet break testing too slow (A note on integration here and the new break plate)
    a. Rewrite the notes from Alex  
3. MDI connector and inconsistent power / CAN  
    a. Car intermittently wouldn't move for an inexplicable reason  
    b. top shell hitting connector to DRD too  
    c. MDI connector bad  
    d. Tons of attempted motor reflashes to fix it? Fix what?  
4. First drive, motor power wires interferance with rotor of motor  
    a. Wire rubbing and bolt?  
    b. Multiple people heard this  
    c. Motor temperature increased (FET temp?)  
    d. Car stopped moving, after a couple minutes it continued moving  
5. Plastic deposition on motor   
    a. Try to get rid of it with IPA  
6. Get new motor from the University of Toronto  
    a. Break caliper issue comes later  
    b. Attempt to use motor stand from illini? Berkeley?  
    c. Motor initially doesn't work with our controller  
    d. It goes back and forth really quickly  
    e. Try a lot of things with Sasha (great guy)  
    f. it wasn't deterministic interferance  
    g. Give motor LCR specs  
    h. Swap hall effect sense lines around to match motor power phase lines, then it works  
    i. The motor thinks it's in reverse, 10A max, get to track.  
    j. Solve reverse issue after a few hours. (Aarjav pls expand here)  
    k. Now full power on the track! Max 75 kmph!
7. Break calipre issue  
    a. New motor from UofT has a thinner break disc  
    b. Show video  
    c. Break pad(?) falls out and stays there, stuck  
    d. Not constantly breaking on one edge of the break pad(?) and heating up  
    e. Motor FET temperature was also abnormally high  

Going to need a way to share videos here

Write another blog posts on insights from other teams

Write another one (maybe combine) about what to improve about UBC Solar, a vision for UBC Solar in 2028  
What is required for WSC 2028

Maybe write one analyzing data from comp too on Influx

What is the goal of this blog post?  
1. List all issues in technical detail
2. Explain how this is all solvable for next comp

Last summer, during the Formula Sun Grand Prix (FSGP) event in 2024 UBC Solar completed 94 laps (98 minus penalties). This year, we completed 5 official laps (during the first we got stuck at turn 18).

With a car that was already working from last year and a year to improve it, I (and presumably everyone else) expected to either match our previous results or surpass them. Instead, we did about 5% of the year before.

In this blog post I'll describe all the technical issues we faced and broader organizational issues and what we missed in our preparation for competition.

We all pulled several all nighters and solved several seemingly impossible problems and learned a lot from comp. This was absolutely the most fun and rewarding experience of my life, but we did sevearly underperformance our results last year and this is worth examining.

In the next week I'll write a couple more blog posts about comp. First, a summary of everything I learned from other teams, then using this info a vision for the future of UBC Solar, and then a review of FSGP competition data since 2021.

I took 5,211 words of notes during comp and all are available [here](https://github.com/CKalitin/ckalitin.github.io/tree/master/assets/fsgp2025).

### **What Competition Preparation Should Have Been**

The primary issues with UBC Solar's preparation for FSGP 2025 is the lack of paranoia about keeping the car drivable and in a fully working state. 

We raced last year and the car worked extremely well, enough to get 6th place out of 26 teams. This made us complacent about finding and fixing issues throughout the term and instead we made small changes that didn't really improve probability of success during comp.

I'm on the Battery Management Systems (BMS) subteam and my project for 5 months was characterizing the main pack current sensor. In the end, this eliminated at most a 1.5 amp error for a 60 A max battery pack.

This is a nice feature and I [learned](https://ckalitin.github.io/projects/2024/12/27/esp32-adc-characterization.html) a [huge](https://ckalitin.github.io/projects/2024/12/29/scpi-auto-characterization.html) [amount](https://ckalitin.github.io/technical/2025/03/26/stm32-rcc-register.html) about our BMS and firmware programming, but this does not directly increase probability of success during comp (aside from Battery Scrutineering going slightly easier because we don't have to explain to scrutineers that our current sensor is inaccurate).

In contrast, last year UBC Solar went through a mad dash before comp to get the car ready. All major components of the car were assembled just a couple months before competition and we had no spare time to nice-to-haves like an accurate current sensor. This meant the entire focus was getting the car to be successful at competiton, and this year instead the focus was on nice-to-haves until we noticed far too late that the car was not ready (mostly BMS issues, as you'll see later).

My understanding is that our old Electrical lead, Mischa Johal, was particularly instrumental in getting the car ready for comp and he along with the rest of the team worked extremely hard. His blog post [Reflecting On UBC Solar](https://mischajohal.com/Thoughts/Reflecting-on-UBC-Solar) goes into detail about comp in 2024 and is an extremely useful read for anyone on an Solar Car team.

All the members were extremely familiar with the systems in the car prior to FSGP 2024 because they were the ones who built them and scrambled at the end to get it all integrated. This was a great team that put together a car that performed better than UBC Solar ever had. However, only two of the people who went to comp in 2024 went in 2025, Alex Malkowski (Mechanical lead), and Julie Ibrahimova (Previously Battery Mechanical lead and now captain).

This means the team as a whole was less prepared for comp than we were last year, especially since we didn't get the valuable learning experience of frantically getting all the systems working prior to comp like we had in 2024.

**What We Should Have Done**

On the last day of competition an observer (observers make sure you don't cheat by charging from the wall or do something too stupid) from ETS (A cracked solar car team), Antoine Lapointe, was observing our team as we debugged the motor before our final laps around the track. I had the opportunity to ask him 38 minutes worth of techical questions.

One of the most important insights was that ETS did 700 kilometers of testing on a track around Montreal before going to the World Solar Challenge this year. In contrast, UBC Solar had under 10 testing days and likely drove under 50 km total. Furthermore, all of our testing was focused on dynamics and not sustained driving. You can imagine that 94 laps around a track is more about sustained driving than dynamics (eg. faster turning and quick breaking).

**AARJAV!!!!! WHAT DISTANCE DID WE DRIVE IN PRE COMP TESTING????**

**ATTACH AUM VIDEO OF STRESS TESTING**
*The most extreme testing was one of our drivers, Aum, stress testing the cars suspension / wheel wells by (seemingly extremely dangerously) driving in a circle around a parking lot.*

If we had dedicated track days with the car where we aimed to drive 100 km for example, we would have been far more ready for comp.

Furthermore, the issues from comp last year should have been better communicated so that we could know what to expect. Not nice-to-haves, but what went horribly wrong. I don't know exactly what happened last year at comp, but hopefully our next members (recruiting starts in 2 months!) will read this and get a good idea of what to expect and what to watch out for.

Both of these things could have been laid out as goals by our leadership. Fundamentally, a big choice like a 100 km track day can only be made by leadership. If one of the captain, mech lead, or elec lead decided we'd have a track day a month prior to comp we would have been far better prepared for competition (You guys are great, but we should have done better at comp and this is how we do better next time!).

This shows the high leverage impact that great leadership can have. One good decision early on, like decided we'd spend the money to have a track day and attempt 100 km, would have had a huge positive impact for competition.

### **Issue 1: BMS Slaveboards**


